DOCSP-45366 Encryption (#89)
mongodb/docs-mongoid: source/security/encryption.txt

.. _mongoid-encryption:

==================================
Client-Side Field Level Encryption
==================================

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::
   :keywords: ruby framework, odm, security, encrypt data, csfle, code example

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to encrypt your data by using **client-side
field level encryption** (CSFLE). CSFLE allows you to encrypt data in your
application before sending it over the network to MongoDB. This means that no
MongoDB product has access to your data in unencrypted form.

You can set up CSFLE by using one of the following mechanisms:

- Automatic encryption: Allows you to perform encrypted read and write
  operations without specifying how to encrypt fields
- Explicit encryption: Allows you to perform encrypted read and write operations
  with specified encryption logic throughout your application.

> This guide details how to set up CSFLE with automatic encryption. To learn more

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide describes how to set up CSFLE with automatic encryption. To learn more
```

> about using explicit encryption, see the `Explicit Encryption guide
> <https://www.mongodb.com/docs/ruby-driver/current/reference/in-use-encryption/client-side-encryption/#explicit-encryption>`__ 
> in the Ruby driver documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
about using explicit encryption, see the :ruby:`Explicit Encryption
</reference/in-use-encryption/client-side-encryption/#explicit-encryption>` guide
in the {+ruby-driver+} documentation.
```

Install Dependencies
--------------------

> To use CSFLE with {+odm+} you must first install the following dependencies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use CSFLE with {+odm+}, you must first install the following dependencies:
```

- ``libmongocrypt``

> - The Automatic Encryption Shared Library on Ruby versions 2.19 or later. Or
>   ``mongocryptd`` on Ruby versions 2.18 or earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Automatic Encryption Shared Library if you are using {+ruby-driver+} v2.19 or later
- ``mongocryptd`` if you are using {+ruby-driver+} v2.18 or earlier
```

- ``ffi``

> The following sections provide details on how to install the preceding
> dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections provide details on how to install these
dependencies.
```

libmongocrypt
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> You can install ``libmongocrypt`` by adding the `libmongocrypt-helper gem
> <https://github.com/mongodb/libmongocrypt-helper-ruby>`__ to your ``Gemfile``
> or by downloading the library manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can install ``libmongocrypt`` by adding the :github:`libmongocrypt-helper gem
<mongodb/libmongocrypt-helper-ruby>`__ to your ``Gemfile``
or by downloading the library manually.
```

To install ``libmongocrypt`` by adding the gem file, navigate to the folder in
which your application is located and run the following command in your shell:

.. code-block:: bash

   gem install libmongocrypt-helper --pre

.. note::

   Because the version number of ``libmongocrypt-helper`` might contain letters,
   which indicates a pre-release version in Ruby, the ``--pre`` flag is
   required.

To learn how to download and install the library manually, see the
`libmongocrypt installation guide
<https://www.mongodb.com/docs/ruby-driver/current/reference/in-use-encryption/client-side-encryption/#libmongocrypt>`__

> in the Ruby driver documentation.

Reviewer: S: use roles/ source constants

> Shared Library (Ruby v2.19 or later)
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shared Library (Driver v2.19 or later)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

The following steps detail how to install the Automatic Encryption Shared

> Library:

Reviewer: S: consider creating a SC for the library name

> 1. In a browser, navigate to the `MongoDB Download Center
>    <https://www.mongodb.com/try/download/enterprise>`__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In a browser, navigate to the :website:`MongoDB Download Center
   </try/download/enterprise>`.
```

#. Select the latest current version in the ``Version`` dropdown, denoted by the 
   ``(current)`` tag.
#. Select your platform in the ``Platform`` dropdown.
#. Select ``crypt_shared`` in the ``Package`` dropdown.
#. Click the ``Download`` button to download the shared library.

After you download the file, extract the contents and save the

> file in a location that is accessible to your application. Then, configure your

Reviewer: S; to fix vale error
```suggestion
file in a location that your application can access. Then, configure your
```

``mongoid.yml`` file in your application to point to the library, as shown in
the following example:

.. code-block:: ruby
   :emphasize-lines: 5-7

   development:
     clients:
       default:
         options:
           auto_encryption_options:
             extra_options:
               crypt_shared_lib_path: '<Path to Shared Library>'

> mongocryptd (Ruby v2.18 or earlier)
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mongocryptd (Driver v2.18 or earlier)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

> If you are using Ruby version 2.18 or earlier, you must use ``mongocryptd``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are using {+ruby-driver+} version 2.18 or earlier, you must use ``mongocryptd``
```

instead of the Automatic Encryption Shared Library. ``mongocryptd`` comes
pre-packaged with enterprise builds of MongoDB Server. For instructions on how to
install and configure ``mongocryptd``, see the :manual:`Install mongocryptd guide
</core/csfle/reference/install-library/#steps>` in the MongoDB
{+server-manual+}.

ffi
~~~

{+odm+} uses the `ffi gem <https://github.com/ffi/ffi>`__ to call functions from
``libmongocrypt``. Add the gem to your ``Gemfile`` by running the following
command in your shell:

.. code-block:: bash

   gem 'ffi'

Create a Customer Master Key
----------------------------

To encrypt and decrypt data, you must first create a Customer Master Key (CMK).
A CMK is a key that you use to encrypt your :ref:`Data Encryption Key
<mongoid-dek>` (DEK). Without access to a CMK, your client application cannot decrypt
DEKs associated with your encrypted data.

You can create a locally-stored key to use as a local CMK for testing purposes
by running the following Ruby code:

.. code-block:: ruby

   require 'securerandom'

   SecureRandom.hex(48)

.. warning::

>    Using a local CMK in a production environment is insecure. For production
>    environments we recommend using a remote key management service to create and
>    store your CMK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Using a local CMK in a production environment is insecure. In production
   environments, use a remote key management service to create and
   store your CMK.
```

   To learn more about key management service providers, see the :manual:`KMS Providers
   guide </core/queryable-encryption/fundamentals/kms-providers>` in the MongoDB 
   {+server-manual+}.

Configure your Client
---------------------

CSFLE requires additional configuration for your MongoDB client. To configure a
client for CSFLE, add the following code to your ``mongoid.yml`` file:

.. code-block:: bash

   development:
     clients:
       default:

>          uri: <Your connection URI>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         uri: <connection string>
```

         options:
           auto_encryption_options: # This key enables automatic encryption
             key_vault_namespace: 'encryption.__keyVault' # Database and collection in which to store data keys
             kms_providers: # Tells the driver where to obtain master keys
               local: # Specifies that the key is local
                 key: "<Path to your CMK>"
             extra_options:
               crypt_shared_lib_path: '<Path to Shared Library>' # Only required for Ruby versions 2.19 or later

.. note::

   Ensure that you replace the placeholders surrounded by brackets (``<>``) in the preceding code
   example.

.. _mongoid-dek:

Create a Data Encryption Key
----------------------------

A Data Encryption Key (DEK) is a key that you use to encrypt the fields in your
documents. MongoDB stores DEKs, encrypted with your CMK, in the Key Vault
collection as BSON documents. MongoDB can never decrypt the DEKs, as key
management is client-side and customer controlled.

> To create a DEK in {+odm+}, you can use the
> ``db:mongoid:encryption:create_data_key`` rake task, as shown in the following
> example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a DEK in {+odm+} in a Rails application, you can use the
``db:mongoid:encryption:create_data_key`` rake task, as shown in the following
example:
```

Author: The original docs don't mention that this is for a Rails app. Is there something specific that makes this for Rails?

.. code-block:: bash

   rake db:mongoid:encryption:create_data_key

You can create multiple DEKs by repeating the preceding command for the number
of keys you want to generate.

You can also provide an alternate name for your DEK. This allows you to reference
the DEK by name when configuring encryption for your fields and
to dynamically assign a DEK to a field at runtime.

The following example creates an alternate name when generating a new DEK:

.. code-block:: bash

>    rake db:mongoid:encryption:create_data_key -- --key-alt-name=my_data_key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   rake db:mongoid:encryption:create_data_key -- --key-alt-name=<custom name>
```

Configure Encryption Schema
---------------------------

You can specify which fields to encrypt by adding the ``encrypt`` option to the
field definition in your models and specifying the ``deterministic`` and
``key_id`` options, as shown in the following example:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/security/encryption.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: start-encryption-schema
   :end-before: end-encryption-schema

.. note::

   If you are developing a Rails application, we recommend setting the
   ``preload_models`` option to ``true`` in your ``mongoid.yml`` file. This
   ensures that {+odm+} loads all models and configures the encryption schema
   before any data is read or written.

Limitations
-----------

The following limitations apply when using CSFLE with {+odm+}:

- {+odm+} does not support encryption of ``embeds_many`` associations.
- If you use the ``:key_name_field`` option, the field must be encrypted using

>   a non-deterministic algorithm. To encrypt your field deterministically, you must

Reviewer: S: convert to active voice

  specify the ``:key_id`` option instead.

> - The limitations listed on the :manual:`CSFLE Limitations
>   </core/csfle/reference/limitations/>` page also apply to {+odm+}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The limitations listed on the :manual:`CSFLE Limitations
  </core/csfle/reference/limitations/>` page in the {+server-manual+} also apply to {+odm+}.
```

Working with Data
-----------------

> In most cases, automatic CSLFE works transparently in your application. After

Reviewer: S: vale

your application is configured for CSFLE, you can create documents as usual and {+odm+}
automatically encrypts and decrypts them according to your configuration.

> The following example creates a new ``Patients`` document in an application
> configured for CSFLE. It then uses a client called ``unencrypted_client``, that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example creates a new ``Patient`` document in an application
configured for CSFLE. It then uses a client called ``unencrypted_client`` that
```

is connected to the database but not configured for CSFLE, to read the document.

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/security/encryption.rb
      :language: ruby
      :start-after: start-query-encrypted
      :end-before: end-query-encrypted

   .. output::

      {"_id"=>BSON::ObjectId('6446a1d046ebfd701f9f4292'),
      "category"=>"ER",
      "passport_id"=><BSON::Binary:0x404080 type=ciphertext data=0x012889b2cb0b1341...>,
      "blood_type"=><BSON::Binary:0x404560 type=ciphertext data=0x022889b2cb0b1341...>,
      "ssn"=><BSON::Binary:0x405040 type=ciphertext data=0x012889b2cb0b1341...>,
      "insurance"=>{"_id"=>BSON::ObjectId('6446a1d046ebfd701f9f4293'),
      "insurer"=>"TK", "policy_number"=><BSON::Binary:0x405920 type=ciphertext
      data=0x012889b2cb0b1341...>}, "policy_number_key"=>"my_data_key"}

In the preceding example, the ``unencrypted_client`` client is unable to read
the encrypted fields. However, if you query the document with a client that *is* 
configured for CSFLE, {+odm+} automatically decrypts the fields.

Rotate Encryption Keys
----------------------

You can rotate your encryption keys by using the ``rewrap_many_data_key`` Ruby

> driver method. This method automatically decrypts multiple data encryption keys

Reviewer: S use source constant

and re-encrypts them using a specified CMK. It then updates the rotated keys in
the key vault collection. 

The ``rewrap_many_data_key`` method takes the following parameters:

> - A filter, used to specify which fields to rotate. If no data key matches the
>   given filter, no keys will be rotated. Omit the filter to rotate all keys in
>   your key vault collection.
> - An object that represents a new CMK with which to re-encrypt the DEKs. Omit
>   this object to rotate the data keys by using their current CMKs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Filter, used to specify which fields to rotate. If no data key matches the
  given filter, no keys will be rotated. Omit the filter to rotate all keys in
  your key vault collection.
- Object that represents a new CMK with which to re-encrypt the DEKs. Omit
  this object to rotate the data keys by using their current CMKs.
```

  this object to rotate the data keys by using their current CMKs.

The following example rotates encryption keys by using the AWS KMS:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/security/encryption.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: start-rewrap-keys
   :end-before: end-rewrap-keys

Add Automatic Encryption to Existing Project
--------------------------------------------

Automatic CSFLE with {+odm+} supports encryption in place. You can enable
encryption on an existing database and still read unencrypted data. However,
once you enable encryption, all new data is encrypted, and any query operation
uses only the encrypted documents. This means that queries might not return all documents
if some were saved before enabling encryption.

The following example queries a collection that has one encrypted document and
one unencrypted document:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/security/encryption.rb
   :language: ruby
   :start-after: start-in-place
   :end-before: end-in-place

You can encrypt existing data in a collection by reading and then writing back
all data with a CSFLE-enabled client. When doing so, ensure that all existing

> data is the expected type and that empty values are not set as ``nil``. 

Author: Good call, I meant to add that section but it slipped my mind
